melange: emit stanza docs (#6384)
ocaml/dune: doc/melange.rst

JavaScript Compilation With Melange
***********************************

Introduction
------------

`Melange <https://github.com/melange-re/melange>`_ is a compiler from OCaml to
JavaScript. Unlike js_of_ocaml, Melange works by translating OCaml compiler
internal lambda representation to JS files. This allows to produce a single
JavaScript file from each OCaml module. Melange can be installed with
`opam, Esy, or Nix <https://github.com/melange-re/melange#installation>`_
package managers.

Dune can build projects using Melange, and it allows to generate JavaScript
files by defining a :ref:`melange-emit` stanza. Dune libraries can be used
with Melange, by leveraging the ``(modes melange)`` field in the :ref:`library`
stanza.

To enable Melange support in a Dune project, specify the Melange language

> version in the :ref:`dune-project` file. Adding

Reviewer: should we mention that this is only available if you have `(lang dune 3.6)` in your `dune-project`?

.. code:: scheme

    (using melange 0.1)

to a :ref:`dune-project` file enables using the ``melange.emit`` stanza and the
``(modes melange)`` field for the :ref:`library` stanza.

.. _melange-emit:

melange.emit
------------

> The Melange emit stanza allows to generate JavaScript from Melange libraries and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ``melange.emit`` stanza allows to generate JavaScript from Melange libraries and
```

> modules. It could be seen as the OCaml :ref:`executable` stanza, but for Melange

Reviewer: ```suggestion
modules. It's analogous to the OCaml :ref:`executable` stanza, but for Melange
```

projects:

.. code:: scheme

    (melange.emit
     (target <target>)
     (module_system <module_system>)
     <optional-fields>)

> ``<target>`` is the name of the target folder that will be used to place or the
> JavaScript artifacts resulting from the build. In particular, the folder will be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``<target>`` is the name of the folder where resulting JavaScript artifacts will
be placed. In particular, the folder will be
```

placed under ``_build/default/$path-to-directory-of-melange-emit-stanza``.

> The JavaScript artifacts will be placed following the file layout of the source
> tree. For example, given the following source tree:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The result of building a  ``melange.emit`` stanza will match the file structure of the source
tree. For example, given the following source tree:
```

.. code:: bash

    ├── dune # (melange.emit (target output) (libraries lib) (module_system es6))
    ├── app.ml
    └── lib
        ├── dune # (library (name lib) (modes melange))
        └── helper.ml

The resulting layout in ``_build/default`` will be as follows:

.. code:: bash

    output
    ├── melange__App.js
    └── lib
        ├── lib__.js
        ├── lib__Helper.js
        └── lib.js

> ``<module_system>`` specifies the JavaScript import and export formats used. The

Reviewer: `format{s,}` because we only allow one format per `melange.emit` stanza?

```suggestion
``<module_system>`` specifies the JavaScript import and export format used. The
```

values allowed are ``es6`` and ``commonjs``.

  - ``es6`` will follow `JavaScript modules <https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Guide/Modules>`_,
    and will produce imports like ``import * from 'foo'`` and exports like
    ``export let ....``
  - ``commonjs`` will follow `CommonJS modules <https://nodejs.org/api/modules.html>`_,
    and will produce imports like ``require('foo')`` and exports like ``module.exports = ....``

``<optional-fields>`` are:

- ``(entries <modules>)`` specifies what modules will be built with Melange. By
  default, Dune will use all the ``.ml/.re`` files in the same directory as the

>   ``dune`` file. This includes ones present in the file system as well

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``dune`` file. This includes module sources present in the file system as well
```

>   as ones generated by user rules. You can restrict this list by using a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  as modules generated by user rules. You can restrict this list by using a
```

>   as ones generated by user rules. You can restrict this list by using a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  as ones generated by user rules. You can restrict this list by using an
```

  ``(entries <modules>)`` field. ``<modules>`` uses the :ref:`ordered-set-language`,
  where elements are module names and don't need to start with an uppercase
  letter. For instance, to exclude module ``Foo``, use ``(entries (:standard \
  foo))``

> - ``(libraries <library-dependencies>)`` specifies the library's dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``(libraries <library-dependencies>)`` specifies Melange library dependencies.
```

  Melange libraries can only use the simple form, like
  ``(libraries foo pkg.bar)``. Keep in mind the following limitations:
  - The ``re_export`` and ``select`` forms are not
  supported.

> - ``(package <package>)`` allows to define to which JavaScript package the
>   artifacts produced by the ``melange.emit`` stanza will belong to. This is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- ``(package <package>)`` allows to define to which JavaScript package to
  which artifacts produced by the ``melange.emit`` stanza will belong. This is
```

Author: @anmonteiro "to which ... to which"?

Reviewer: updated

  useful when the ``libraries`` field includes a public library, as it helps

>   making  sure the modules from the library and the entry modules that are part

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  making sure that the modules from the ``libraries`` and the ``entries`` fields that are part
```

  of the ``melange.emit`` stanza belong to the same resulting JavaScript
  package.

- ``(preprocess <preprocess-spec>)`` specifies how to preprocess files when
  needed. The default is ``no_preprocessing``, and other options are described
  in the :ref:`preprocessing-spec` section.

- ``(preprocessor_deps (<deps-conf list>))`` specifies extra preprocessor

>   dependencies preprocessor, i.e., if the preprocessor reads a generated file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  dependencies, e.g. if the preprocessor reads a generated file.
```

>   The specification of dependencies is described in the :ref:`deps-field`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Dependency specification is described in the :ref:`deps-field`
```

  section.

- ``(flags <flags>)`` specifies compilation flags to be passed to ``melc``, the

>   command line tool for the Melange compiler that produces the ``.js`` artifacts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Melange compiler that produces the ``.js`` artifacts.
```

>   ``<flags>`` is specified in the :ref:`ordered-set-language`. It also supports

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``<flags>`` is described in detail in the :ref:`ordered-set-language` section. It also supports
```

>   ``(:include ...)`` forms. The default value for is taken from the environment,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  ``(:include ...)`` forms. The default value for this field is taken from the environment and,
```

>   as a result it's recommended to write ``(flags ...)`` fields as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  as a result, it's recommended to write ``(flags ...)`` fields as
```

>   follows: ``(flags (:standard <my options>))``

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  follows: ``(flags :standard <my options>)``
```

Limitations
===========

> - JavaScript "monorepos" are not supported, so the use case of having multiple

Reviewer: why are they not supported? Dune should be able to build them, then it's up to the user to decide how to depend on them (at runtime). Am I missing something?

Author: Hm, you are right. As we have not tested this scenario yet, I wanted to mention something like "here be dragons". 

For now I removed the whole paragraph in https://github.com/ocaml/dune/pull/6384/commits/3d4ca7104e53ac6a79b19d10b269b0df349921f9, once we test this use case, maybe add some template, we can document it properly.

  JavaScript packages produced by Melange in a single project (i.e.
  `Yarn <https://classic.yarnpkg.com/blog/2017/08/02/introducing-workspaces/>`_
  or `npm <https://docs.npmjs.com/cli/v7/using-npm/workspaces>`_ workspaces) is
  not guaranteed to work.

> - Libraries that are placed above the directory where the ``melange.emit``

Reviewer: I don't know whether this should be documented as a "limitation". This is a consequence of the Dune model, isn't it?

Author: It is, but I don't think it hurts to mention it. It is reasonable to expect that some Melange users are not familiar with Dune model, so they might be surprised.

Also, the issue is not exclusively caused by Dune model, but by the way we decided to design `melange.emit` stanza. If this was a stanza that belongs to `dune-project`, the problem of depending on libs outside the scope would not exist.

  stanza is located can not be used, due to the file layout requirements
  mentioned above in the ``target`` field description.

> - Libraries that are part of the installed world are not supported as

Reviewer: what's the installed world? "Findlib libraries"?

Author: Yes. I wanted to express that we don't yet support installing Melange libraries with opam. Maybe the docs should just say that.

  dependencies in ``melange.emit`` stanzas. Only libraries defined in the

>   current scope can be used, either using their real name or the public name.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  current scope can be used, either using their ``name`` or ``public_name``.
```

Simple Project
--------------

> Let see how a simple project with Melange and Dune would look like.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's look at building a simple project with Melange and Dune.
```

> First, make sure we have a :ref:`dune-project` file with a Melange lang stanza
> present:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, make sure that the a :ref:`dune-project` file contains a ``(using melange 0.1)`` stanza:
```

Author: Suggestion had some weird phrasing "that the a `dune-project`..". Included this change in https://github.com/ocaml/dune/pull/6384/commits/003c2bb7a19de1cf5f066f629cc5a7f31e261c9c.

.. code:: scheme

  (lang dune 3.6)
  (using melange 0.1)

> Next we need a :ref:`dune<dune-files>` file with a :ref:`melange-emit` stanza:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, write a :ref:`dune<dune-files>` file with a :ref:`melange-emit` stanza:
```

.. code:: scheme

  (melange.emit
    (target output)

>     (module_system es6))

Reviewer 2: 1 space indentation please.

> Finally, we need some ``.ml`` file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, add a ``.ml`` source file to build:
```

.. code:: bash

  echo 'Js.log "hello from melange"' > hello.ml

> Now we run ``dune build output/melange__Hello.js``. After this is complete, we
> get the following files:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, run ``dune build output/melange__Hello.js``. Dune produces the following structure once it's done building:
```

.. code::

  .
  ├── _build
  │   └── default
  │       └── melange__Hello.js
  ├── dune
  ├── dune-project
  └── hello.ml

> One can then run the ``.js`` target:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The resulting ``.js`` target can now be run:
```
